docs/RENDER_DEPLOYMENT.md, before:

# Render Deployment Guide

This guide provides instructions for deploying the Insurance Report Generator backend on Render.

## Setting Up the Backend Service

1. Create a new **Web Service** on Render
2. Connect to your GitHub repository
3. Configure the service with the following settings:
   - **Name**: `insurance-report-generator-api` (or your preferred name)
   - **Runtime**: Python 3
   - **Build Command**: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
   - **Start Command**: `python -m uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port $PORT`
   - **Root Directory**: `/backend` (root of repository)

> **IMPORTANT FIX**: Ensure that the start command includes `python -m` before `uvicorn` to ensure proper module resolution.

## Environment Variables

Add the following environment variables in the Render dashboard. Replace placeholder values with your actual production values:

```
# API Keys
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key

# Supabase Configuration
SUPABASE_URL=https://your-production-project-id.supabase.co
SUPABASE_KEY=your-production-supabase-anon-key-here

# File Storage Settings (Path is relative to project root on Render)
UPLOAD_DIR=/opt/render/project/src/uploads
GENERATED_REPORTS_DIR=/opt/render/project/src/generated_reports
MAX_UPLOAD_SIZE=52428800

# Data Retention Settings
DATA_RETENTION_HOURS=24

# API Settings
API_RATE_LIMIT=100

# AI Model Settings
DEFAULT_MODEL=anthropic/claude-3-opus-20240229
MAX_TOKENS=32000

# CORS Settings
FRONTEND_URL=https://your-frontend-domain.vercel.app
CORS_ALLOW_ALL=false

# Runtime Settings
NODE_ENV=production
DEBUG=false
```

## Fixing Import Issues

### ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'backend.utils.file_handler'

If you encounter import errors related to the `backend` prefix, we've implemented two solutions:

1. **Path Fixing Module (Recommended)**: We've added a `fix_paths.py` module that automatically handles both relative and absolute imports
   - This module is now imported at the top of `main.py` 
   - It adds the necessary directories to the Python path
   - It creates a mock 'backend' module in `sys.modules` to handle imports with the 'backend' prefix

2. **Ensure __init__.py Files**: Run our helper script before deployment
   ```bash
   # Run from the project root
   python backend/scripts/ensure_init_files.py
   ```
   This script creates missing `__init__.py` files in all subdirectories, ensuring Python correctly recognizes them as packages.

3. **Update Import Statements**: As a fallback solution, you can also update import statements:
   ```python
   # Change FROM this (problematic in production):
   from backend.utils.file_handler import save_uploaded_file
   
   # TO this (works in both environments):
   from utils.file_handler import save_uploaded_file
   ```

### Start Command for Render

Make sure your start command in Render is set to:

```
python -c "import os; [open(os.path.join(root, '__init__.py'), 'a').close() for root, dirs, files in os.walk('.') if os.path.isdir(root) and not root.startswith('./.') and not os.path.exists(os.path.join(root, '__init__.py'))]" && python -m uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port $PORT
```

This start command does two important things:
1. Creates missing `__init__.py` files in all subdirectories to ensure proper package resolution 
2. Starts uvicorn with the `-m` flag to ensure proper module resolution

The `-m` prefix is critical as it ensures proper module resolution regardless of the current working directory.

> **NOTE**: Since your Root Directory setting in Render is already set to `/backend`, do not include `cd backend` in your start command as this would cause it to look for a nested backend directory that doesn't exist.

### UploadQueryResult Import Error

If you encounter the "UploadQueryResult is not defined" error or similar import issues:

1. Check the import statements in your API files (particularly in `backend/api/upload.py`)
2. Ensure any referenced types or classes are properly imported
3. Add the missing import to your file:

```python
# In backend/api/upload.py, add the missing import
from api.schemas import APIResponse, UploadQueryResult  # Add missing imports
```

4. Push the changes to your repository and redeploy

## Persistent Storage on Render

Render's default filesystem is ephemeral. For a production application, you should use either:

1. **Render Disk** - Persistent storage option provided by Render
   - Add a persistent disk in the Render dashboard
   - Mount it at `/var/data`
   - Update `UPLOAD_DIR` and `GENERATED_REPORTS_DIR` to use this path:
     ```
     UPLOAD_DIR=/var/data/uploads
     GENERATED_REPORTS_DIR=/var/data/generated_reports
     ```

2. **Supabase Storage** - Better for scaling and reliability
   - Update your file handling logic to use Supabase Storage
   - This approach is recommended for production

## Proper Module Imports

To avoid import errors in production:

1. Use absolute imports in your Python files:
   ```python
   # Good - use absolute imports
   from backend.utils.error_handler import logger
   
   # Avoid - can cause issues in production
   from utils.error_handler import logger
   ```

2. Use the `python -m` prefix when running with uvicorn to ensure proper module resolution:
   ```
   python -m uvicorn main:app
   ```

3. Ensure `__init__.py` files exist in all directories to make them proper packages

## Managing Python Dependencies

### Avoiding Dependency Conflicts

The backend uses several Python packages that may have conflicting dependency requirements. Here are some tips to avoid common issues:

1. **Pin critical dependencies**:
   - `httpx>=0.24.0,<0.25.0` - Required for compatibility with supabase 2.0.0
   - `urllib3<2.0.0` - Many packages expect urllib3 versions below 2.0

2. **Use upper bounds**:
   Use upper version bounds for major dependencies to prevent unexpected breaking changes:
   ```
   pydantic>=2.4.2,<3.0.0
   sqlalchemy>=2.0.28,<3.0.0
   ```

3. **Check for conflicts before deployment**:
   Run this command locally to check for dependency conflicts before deploying:
   ```bash
   pip check
   ```

4. **Specify Python version**:
   We've included a `runtime.txt` file that specifies Python 3.11.8, which ensures compatibility with all our dependencies.

### Troubleshooting Dependency Issues

If you encounter dependency conflicts during deployment:

1. Check the build logs to identify the specific conflict
2. Pin the problematic dependency to a compatible version
3. If necessary, upgrade/downgrade other packages to maintain compatibility
4. For complex dependency issues, consider using a pip constraints file

## Deployment Steps

1. Push your code to your GitHub repository
2. In the Render dashboard, click "Create Web Service"
3. Connect to your repository and configure as detailed above
4. Add all the required environment variables
5. Click "Create Web Service"
6. Wait for the build and deployment to complete
7. Monitor the logs for any import or startup errors
8. Your API will be available at `https://your-service-name.onrender.com`

## Post-Deployment Verification

After deployment, verify:

1. The API is responding properly at the `/health` endpoint
2. CORS is correctly configured for your frontend
3. File uploads and processing work correctly
4. Environment variables are set correctly

For any issues, check the Render logs in the dashboard.

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter issues during deployment, please refer to the [Backend Deployment Fixes](./BACKEND_DEPLOYMENT_FIXES.md) document for detailed solutions to common problems.

### Common Issues

1. **Import Errors**: If you see `NameError` exceptions related to missing imports, check that you're using absolute imports in your Python files. See the [Backend Deployment Fixes](./BACKEND_DEPLOYMENT_FIXES.md#import-issues) document for details.

2. **Build Failures**: If your build is failing without a clear error message, see our detailed troubleshooting steps in the [Backend Build Fix](./BACKEND_BUILD_FIX.md) document.

3. **Path Resolution**: Ensure your start command includes `python -m` before `uvicorn` to properly resolve modules. See the [Backend Deployment Fixes](./BACKEND_DEPLOYMENT_FIXES.md#path-and-module-resolution) section.

4. **Environment Variables**: Make sure all required environment variables are properly set in the Render dashboard.

## Streamlined Deployment Process

We've created a streamlined preparation script that handles all the necessary steps for Render deployment:

```bash
python backend/scripts/prepare_for_render.py
```

This script:
1. Fixes imports by removing `backend.` prefixes
2. Ensures proper path resolution
3. Verifies imports work correctly
4. Provides instructions for committing and deploying

### Deployment Workflow

For a successful Render deployment:

1. **Prepare the codebase**:
   ```bash
   python backend/scripts/prepare_for_render.py
   ```

2. **Commit changes to a deployment branch**:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b deploy-to-render
   git add .
   git commit -m "Prepare for Render deployment"
   git push origin deploy-to-render
   ```

3. **Configure Render** using the deployment branch:
   - Set the root directory to: `backend`
   - Set the build command to: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
   - Set the start command to: `python -m uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port $PORT`

This approach ensures your application deploys correctly while maintaining a clean development codebase.

Commit message:

Docs: Update Render deployment with dedicated entry point solution

docs/RENDER_DEPLOYMENT.md, after:

# Render Deployment Guide

This guide provides instructions for deploying the Insurance Report Generator backend on Render.

## Setting Up the Backend Service

1. Create a new **Web Service** on Render
2. Connect to your GitHub repository
3. Configure the service with the following settings:
   - **Name**: `insurance-report-generator-api` (or your preferred name)
   - **Runtime**: Python 3
   - **Build Command**: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
   - **Start Command**: `python -m uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port $PORT`
   - **Root Directory**: `/backend` (root of repository)

> **IMPORTANT FIX**: Ensure that the start command includes `python -m` before `uvicorn` to ensure proper module resolution.

## Environment Variables

Add the following environment variables in the Render dashboard. Replace placeholder values with your actual production values:

```
# API Keys
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=your_openrouter_api_key

# Supabase Configuration
SUPABASE_URL=https://your-production-project-id.supabase.co
SUPABASE_KEY=your-production-supabase-anon-key-here

# File Storage Settings (Path is relative to project root on Render)
UPLOAD_DIR=/opt/render/project/src/uploads
GENERATED_REPORTS_DIR=/opt/render/project/src/generated_reports
MAX_UPLOAD_SIZE=52428800

# Data Retention Settings
DATA_RETENTION_HOURS=24

# API Settings
API_RATE_LIMIT=100

# AI Model Settings
DEFAULT_MODEL=anthropic/claude-3-opus-20240229
MAX_TOKENS=32000

# CORS Settings
FRONTEND_URL=https://your-frontend-domain.vercel.app
CORS_ALLOW_ALL=false

# Runtime Settings
NODE_ENV=production
DEBUG=false
```

## Fixing Import Issues

### ModuleNotFoundError: No module named 'backend.utils.file_handler'

If you encounter import errors related to the `backend` prefix, we've implemented two solutions:

1. **Path Fixing Module (Recommended)**: We've added a `fix_paths.py` module that automatically handles both relative and absolute imports
   - This module is now imported at the top of `main.py` 
   - It adds the necessary directories to the Python path
   - It creates a mock 'backend' module in `sys.modules` to handle imports with the 'backend' prefix

2. **Ensure __init__.py Files**: Run our helper script before deployment
   ```bash
   # Run from the project root
   python backend/scripts/ensure_init_files.py
   ```
   This script creates missing `__init__.py` files in all subdirectories, ensuring Python correctly recognizes them as packages.

3. **Update Import Statements**: As a fallback solution, you can also update import statements:
   ```python
   # Change FROM this (problematic in production):
   from backend.utils.file_handler import save_uploaded_file
   
   # TO this (works in both environments):
   from utils.file_handler import save_uploaded_file
   ```

### Start Command for Render

Make sure your start command in Render is set to:

```
python -c "import os; [open(os.path.join(root, '__init__.py'), 'a').close() for root, dirs, files in os.walk('.') if os.path.isdir(root) and not root.startswith('./.') and not os.path.exists(os.path.join(root, '__init__.py'))]" && python -m uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port $PORT
```

This start command does two important things:
1. Creates missing `__init__.py` files in all subdirectories to ensure proper package resolution 
2. Starts uvicorn with the `-m` flag to ensure proper module resolution

The `-m` prefix is critical as it ensures proper module resolution regardless of the current working directory.

> **NOTE**: Since your Root Directory setting in Render is already set to `/backend`, do not include `cd backend` in your start command as this would cause it to look for a nested backend directory that doesn't exist.

### UploadQueryResult Import Error

If you encounter the "UploadQueryResult is not defined" error or similar import issues:

1. Check the import statements in your API files (particularly in `backend/api/upload.py`)
2. Ensure any referenced types or classes are properly imported
3. Add the missing import to your file:

```python
# In backend/api/upload.py, add the missing import
from api.schemas import APIResponse, UploadQueryResult  # Add missing imports
```

4. Push the changes to your repository and redeploy

## Persistent Storage on Render

Render's default filesystem is ephemeral. For a production application, you should use either:

1. **Render Disk** - Persistent storage option provided by Render
   - Add a persistent disk in the Render dashboard
   - Mount it at `/var/data`
   - Update `UPLOAD_DIR` and `GENERATED_REPORTS_DIR` to use this path:
     ```
     UPLOAD_DIR=/var/data/uploads
     GENERATED_REPORTS_DIR=/var/data/generated_reports
     ```

2. **Supabase Storage** - Better for scaling and reliability
   - Update your file handling logic to use Supabase Storage
   - This approach is recommended for production

## Proper Module Imports

To avoid import errors in production:

1. Use absolute imports in your Python files:
   ```python
   # Good - use absolute imports
   from backend.utils.error_handler import logger
   
   # Avoid - can cause issues in production
   from utils.error_handler import logger
   ```

2. Use the `python -m` prefix when running with uvicorn to ensure proper module resolution:
   ```
   python -m uvicorn main:app
   ```

3. Ensure `__init__.py` files exist in all directories to make them proper packages

## Managing Python Dependencies

### Avoiding Dependency Conflicts

The backend uses several Python packages that may have conflicting dependency requirements. Here are some tips to avoid common issues:

1. **Pin critical dependencies**:
   - `httpx>=0.24.0,<0.25.0` - Required for compatibility with supabase 2.0.0
   - `urllib3<2.0.0` - Many packages expect urllib3 versions below 2.0

2. **Use upper bounds**:
   Use upper version bounds for major dependencies to prevent unexpected breaking changes:
   ```
   pydantic>=2.4.2,<3.0.0
   sqlalchemy>=2.0.28,<3.0.0
   ```

3. **Check for conflicts before deployment**:
   Run this command locally to check for dependency conflicts before deploying:
   ```bash
   pip check
   ```

4. **Specify Python version**:
   We've included a `runtime.txt` file that specifies Python 3.11.8, which ensures compatibility with all our dependencies.

### Troubleshooting Dependency Issues

If you encounter dependency conflicts during deployment:

1. Check the build logs to identify the specific conflict
2. Pin the problematic dependency to a compatible version
3. If necessary, upgrade/downgrade other packages to maintain compatibility
4. For complex dependency issues, consider using a pip constraints file

## Deployment Steps

1. Push your code to your GitHub repository
2. In the Render dashboard, click "Create Web Service"
3. Connect to your repository and configure as detailed above
4. Add all the required environment variables
5. Click "Create Web Service"
6. Wait for the build and deployment to complete
7. Monitor the logs for any import or startup errors
8. Your API will be available at `https://your-service-name.onrender.com`

## Post-Deployment Verification

After deployment, verify:

1. The API is responding properly at the `/health` endpoint
2. CORS is correctly configured for your frontend
3. File uploads and processing work correctly
4. Environment variables are set correctly

For any issues, check the Render logs in the dashboard.

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter issues during deployment, please refer to the [Backend Deployment Fixes](./BACKEND_DEPLOYMENT_FIXES.md) document for detailed solutions to common problems.

### Common Issues

1. **Import Errors**: If you see `NameError` exceptions related to missing imports, check that you're using absolute imports in your Python files. See the [Backend Deployment Fixes](./BACKEND_DEPLOYMENT_FIXES.md#import-issues) document for details.

2. **Build Failures**: If your build is failing without a clear error message, see our detailed troubleshooting steps in the [Backend Build Fix](./BACKEND_BUILD_FIX.md) document.

3. **Path Resolution**: Ensure your start command includes `python -m` before `uvicorn` to properly resolve modules. See the [Backend Deployment Fixes](./BACKEND_DEPLOYMENT_FIXES.md#path-and-module-resolution) section.

4. **Environment Variables**: Make sure all required environment variables are properly set in the Render dashboard.

## Streamlined Deployment Process

We've created a streamlined preparation script that handles all the necessary steps for Render deployment:

```bash
python backend/scripts/prepare_for_render.py
```

This script:
1. Fixes imports by removing `backend.` prefixes
2. Ensures proper path resolution
3. Verifies imports work correctly
4. Provides instructions for committing and deploying

### Deployment Workflow

For a successful Render deployment:

1. **Prepare the codebase**:
   ```bash
   python backend/scripts/prepare_for_render.py
   ```

2. **Commit changes to a deployment branch**:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b deploy-to-render
   git add .
   git commit -m "Prepare for Render deployment"
   git push origin deploy-to-render
   ```

3. **Configure Render** using the deployment branch:
   - Set the root directory to: `backend`
   - Set the build command to: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
   - Set the start command to: `python -m uvicorn main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port $PORT`

This approach ensures your application deploys correctly while maintaining a clean development codebase.

## Ultimate Render Deployment Solution

We've created a dedicated entry point for Render deployments that solves all import and path issues:

### Updated Render Settings

Configure your Render service with:

1. **Root Directory**: `backend`
2. **Build Command**: `pip install -r requirements.txt`
3. **Start Command**: `python -m uvicorn render_app:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port $PORT`

> **CRITICAL**: Note that we're using `render_app:app` instead of `main:app` - this is our special Render entry point that ensures paths are properly configured before any imports happen.

### How It Works

Our `render_app.py` entry point:
1. Sets up the Python path correctly before any imports
2. Adds all necessary directories to the import path
3. Creates any missing `__init__.py` files
4. Verifies that key modules can be imported
5. Only imports the main app after paths are fixed

This approach guarantees that all imports will work correctly regardless of Python's import behavior.

### No Extra Branches Needed

This solution works directly from your `main` branch - no need to create a separate deployment branch. You can develop and deploy from the same codebase without any special preparation steps.
